That's a real difficult... I really didn't think of the book like that.
I mean, again, the book is what it is.
If it's commercial, so be it.
That's fine with me.
I don't have a problem with it.
Literary?
I've been told that's what it is.
And I have no problem with that either.
I mean, I think that's quite flattering to be told that it's literary.
I think that the reader... I mean, I could say this just looking at the book now.
I mean, I think that the reader...
needs to bring something to the table, needs to bring something to the party in order to fully appreciate this book.
And indeed the book was written to encourage the reader to bring and
his own sensibility, his own values, his own belief systems, his own sense of humor, whatever the reader has, his own prejudices and biases, his or her own sensitivity, whatever the reader has to bring to the table, the book was written to
allow for that.
This book is not a seamless book.
This book is full of seams.
It's a book of entries and of segments and sections, what I call analects, A-N-A-L-E-C-T-S.
And it's that lack of connective tissue that I want the reader
to provide him or herself.
The reader can provide the connective tissue of this book.
Ideally, it would be my hope that if, just to pick a number at random, I had 100 different readers, that each one of those 100 different readers would have a wildly varied reaction to this book and to John Brown.
That would please me no end.
Does John Brown mean an enigma for you, or is it very explained and satisfactorily, at least for yourself?
An enigma.
Or is that relevant?
An enigma wrapped inside a conundrum.
Is he an enigma?
I mean... Was he ever an enigma?
He must have been.
Something puzzling about him in the tragedy.
I mean, my initial response is to want to say we're all enigmas, which is kind of a cop-out answer.
He's much less of an enigma to me now, of course, than he was before.
Hopefully, after people are through reading this, he will not remain an enigma to them.
But there's nothing wrong either with the reader feeling
after having read the book, that he is in some part enigmatic and ought to remain so.
I don't think that fiction ought to go around taking events or personalities that are essentially enigmatic and attempt to explain them.
I think you've answered these questions.
We can probably wrap it up on this one.
There are tons of stuff here.
It's all good stuff.
I think, I'm sure you addressed yourself to it earlier, but...
just to clarify once more, is for the reader.
The reader is about to be introduced to John Brown as a fictional character and not as a historical figure.
And I think you also say there's a lot of Bruce Olds in the John Brown movie here.
Is that a fair statement?
Yes, it is.
But it's not fair to say that... This is your John Brown.
Yeah.
I hope so.
I hope that... That was my intention.
to make this my John Brown.
That's not to say, again, I identified those three threads, that's not to say that in a very broad and general way that the parameters of this story, the chronology for the most part, the settings for the most part are historically
accurate.
The general arc, let's put it this way, the general arc of the book and the general arc of the man are pretty close to the historical bone, but just let me give you an example to clarify this for you, if I can, real quickly.
This is the funeral
procession scene.
We're at the back of the book.
What page number?
Page 330.
Okay.
Mary bore his body north from Virginia, swollen with preservatives, and salted it down with lime.
Well, Mary is a real person.
That's his wife.
I'm sure that's how they call it.
She did bear him north from Virginia.
Swollen with preservatives?
Maybe.
Me.
Selted down with line me.
The next sentence gives you a better example of what I'm talking about.
The corpse lay inside an unsanded walnut plank coffin, its lid nailed shut beneath a canvas tarpollin, unfestuned by black crepe or bunting, and battened down with leather belts appropriated from a pair of book-crammed steamer trunks stored in the attic of the Harpers Ferry Public Library.
Total invention.
No, not really.
Speculating.
Well, for instance, I know for a fact that there was no Harper's Ferry Public Library.
So why use it?
Well, I made it up.
Why?
Because it fits in my mind as I was creating it.
It was a very general story, but it felt good to have it be a public library.
Which makes sense, because incidentally, there were no public libraries in 1849.
This book... The first public library was... It's in my book.
It was 1852 in Boston.
You know, public library... There couldn't have been.
Well, you noticed before, and you mentioned certain anachronisms in the book.
That's the biggest one right there.
Yeah, sure.
The last line of the... But I never noticed it.
The last line of the entire book, any errors of fact, as all sins of omission, are strictly my own and entirely premeditated.
Premeditated.
I... You know, that's not there to be flipped.
That's there because I mean it.
It's there because I mean it.
And the anachronisms are there.
They're premeditated.
They're intentional.
I know that these sorts of issues bother people.
They bother people.
It's like the whole... I mean, Caesar is called to the Senate by the ringing of a clock.
Well, I mean, that's a thousand years before the invention of what?
Right.
But it works within the body of the fiction.
It works.
These issues bother people, and I take those issues seriously.
But it's like the furor and the controversy that was engendered by, to use a commercial, popular example, JFK, the movie by Oliver Stone.
I mean, it's just outrage because this was messing or toying with history or fact or whatever.
My own reaction to that movie as my reaction to works of fiction that do that, that mess, is... I don't care about things.
Does it work as a film?
Does it work as a novel?
I think that you've got your disclaimer out of front.
Oliver Stone, however, in that movie, actually offered that as a valid premise.
In every interview that I saw with Oliver Stone, he said, this is my version of events.
Yeah, but I mean, he wanted you to believe that it was a possible scenario.
And he cited sources as documentation.
So, I mean, I don't forgive him for what he did in that movie, but you absolutely made it very clear what you said there.
And you've got it in print right there.
I love Tim O'Brien's book.
Lake of the Woods?
Yeah, isn't that wonderful?
I have not read it.
No solution.
I mean, it's just because we like mysteries.
Listen, I think it's so funny.
I'm going to drive back to Massachusetts tonight.
Okay.
Do you want my phone number in case you just need to ask me anything?
I know that happens sometimes.
Let's just put it in.
I'll have it here.
Okay.
If you're going to get back to me, well, my home in Miami.
Okay, it's 305-899-8053.
I'm probably going to move this for the week following Labor Day.
Okay.
I've asked them, I'd be happy to move it within two weeks, but they really want the book.
I'll be at that number as of next Monday.
Okay.
I would love to describe a couple of things.
Just do that postmodern thing once more.
Right.
Okay, yeah.
That's exactly what you said.
When Alan saw the manuscript for the first time, he noted that there was a certain postmodern cast or color or texture or certain postmodern touches to the manuscript.
And when he said that, when he noticed it,
noted that I knew that I found an editor who understood the work and where I was coming from as a writer.
Again, postmodern can mean a dozen things to a dozen different people, but what it means to me, the way I use the term, is simply that for me it means that one writes to an extent
in violation of certain literary conventions, that one does not write within a tradition of realism or naturalism or romanticism, that one writes against those traditions to an extent.
There's a certain against-ness about postmodernism.
It's subversive to an extent.
And in terms of mechanics,
when you're writing.
Let me just interject.
Sure.
You weren't thinking about this when you were writing.
No, absolutely not.
You did say that you did not want to be constrained by any accepted form of convention.
Right.
And that you really wanted to be free.
To do what you wanted.
Right.
So that you can, if you wish.
You don't literary critic.
Oh, no.
I mean, you know what?
How can you write with an established aesthetic in mind?
Right.
would just be so it would seem to me so stifling and and and and wooden and artificial and contrived to do something like that but i just i did not feel constrained by convention uh and mechanically it means you can violate uh conventions of time and space and and narrative voice uh it means you can slip in and out of point of view uh it means you can ignore
this, that, or the other thing if you feel like it.
And the only test is, finally, does it work?
Does it help the work succeed?
So that's it.
That's all.
Great.
Thank you.